---
title: Biking from Morrisville NY to Hartford CT, 2017
date: 2017-06-04T18:08:50-04:00
permalink: /2017/06/morrisville2017/
categories:
  - Tours with Maps
---
{% include figure image_path="images/2017/2017-05-30-DoughertyPharmacy.jpg" caption="Starting off at the Morrisville pharmacy that still bears my family's name." %}

This week I finally took a bike trip that has been on my mind for several years: a three-day, 210-mile journey from my hometown of Morrisville NY to West Hartford CT. During the seventeen years that Beth and I have lived in Connecticut, we've driven back and forth dozens of times, and on those occasions when we avoided the interstate highways, my mind fixated on finding a bike-friendly route with places to stop along the way. The key was to ride east on US 20 (which now has a bike lane), to NY 145 south through Cobleskill NY (overnight #1), then NY 23 east across the Rip Van Winkle Bridge (with a separate pedestrian path) over the Hudson River, then MA 23 east to Great Barrington MA (overnight #2), then MA/CT 183 south into central Connecticut. See the [full-screen map](https://jackdougherty.github.io/bikemapcode/#8/42.345/-74.211) or the smaller version embedded below:

<iframe src="https://jackdougherty.github.io/bikemapcode/#8/42.345/-74.211" width="100%" height="500px"></iframe>

If you don't mind a few big hills (see the elevation maps below from <http://BikeRoll.net>), it's a pretty nice ride, mostly through beautiful farmland, and for me, many familiar towns from my adolescence. Thought a lot about how much my 12-year-old self began to see the world, one very small town at a time, by riding the school bus with our high school marching band to county fairs and fireman's field days. Plus, I was incredibly lucky to have dodged several showers and thunderstorms, and didn't face a drop of rain during my ride. Got home in time to take a shower before sitting in a dentist's office for a procedure that I had put off for many months. For me, a good bike ride helps to push those unpleasantries out of one's mind.

{% include figure image_path="images/2017/BikeRoll-Morrisville-Cobleskill.png" caption="Day 1: Morrisville to Cobleskill NY (70 miles)" %}

{% include figure image_path="images/2017/BikeRoll-Cobleskill-GreatBarrington.png" caption="Day 2: Cobleskill NY to Great Barrington MA (84 miles)" %}

{% include figure image_path="images/2017/BikeRoll-GreatBarrington-WestHartford.png" caption="Day 3: Great Barrington MA to West Hartford CT (54 miles)" %}
