---
title: 'Mini-Multi-Modal Trip to Europe, April 2024'
date: 2024-04-15
permalink: /mini-multi-modal-europe/
categories:
  - Tours with Maps
  - Brompton
  - Reflections
  - Europe
---
This week I'm taking a mini-multi-modal Europe with my Brompton bike. My goals are to spend time with family, visit a friend, and to pedal around different cities to experience better biking infrastructure than what we currently have in West Hartford, Connecticut. Learn about [bad infrastructure decisions that other Bike West Hartford board members are dealing with](https://bikewesthartford.org/center-master-plan-trading-safety-dining-and-vibrancy-for-parking-spaces/) while I'm away.

Beth and I flew overnight from Hartford to Dublin to spend a day and explore that city on foot and bus. Walking downtown along the river to visit food establishments recommended by friends was lovely. We enjoyed breakfast at the funky [Brother Hubbard - North Location](https://brotherhubbard.ie), where we sat next to a lobster-themed bachelorette party, followed later in the day by pastries and cake at the [Queen of Tarts Bakery](https://www.queenoftarts.ie). We also visited [EPIC: The Irish Emigration Museum](https://epicchq.com), with our common interest in public history and how people tell stories of their past and present. Its focus on the multiple paths taken by people *leaving* Ireland was fascinating (famine, war, colonialism; forced or voluntary resettlement; etc.), followed by an emphasis on *successful* Irish descendants around the world. Very short video biographies of everyday people from the past telling their stories were very effective, and the museum relies heavily on digitized multimedia rather than historical artifacts. Surprisingly, we saw relatively little mention of the Gaelic language or the role of Catholic institutions, but more stories of Irish women and lesbian & gay communities who left in part due to these culturally conservative powers in their nation.

{% include figure image_path="images/2024/europe/dublin.jpg" alt="Dublin images" caption="Beth and I visited the Dublin EPIC museum, after enjoying brunch while seated next to a lobster-themed bachelorette party." %}{: .align-center style="width:75%;"}

The next day, Beth and I returned to Dublin airport and departed in different directions: she to meet our daughters in Paris, and me to visit my friend and co-author Ilya in London. Prior to leaving the US, while packing my Brompton bike inside my cardboard-padded double-bag carrier, I inserted Trader Joe's snacks as requested by Ilya: one large container of chocolate-covered Dunker cookies and two packages of corn puffs (which also served as extra padding to protect my bike). After my luggage and I landed at London Heathrow airport, I unpacked my Brompton and was pleasantly surprised to discover that the snacks survived both airline trips. But I couldn't easily carry both bags of corn puffs on the bike, so gave one to a Heathrow info booth employee who had been very helpful.

{% include figure image_path="images/2024/europe/snacks-packed.jpg" alt="Snack images" caption="Packed snacks for my host inside my cardboard-padded bike bag, which Moose carefully inspected." %}{: .align-center style="width:75%;"}

While the Heathrow airport website includes an [informative cycling page and map](https://www.heathrow.com/transport-and-directions/by-bicycle), and several airport employees ride to work and park their bikes on site, the ideal way to pedal out of the airport is still unclear to me. Currently, one cannot bike straight out of the Central Terminal Area (Terminals 2 and 3) due to construction on a roadway tunnel under a runway. My two choices were to pay for a short bus ride from CTA to a stop along the roadway, or to take the free London Underground train to Terminal 4 and ride out from there. I chose the latter, not to save money, but to experience London's transit system, which I also believe had more room for me and my luggage than a bus. Thank you both Dublin and Heathrow airports for your free luggage carts! But I would have appreciate more bicycle signage when riding out of Heathrow Terminal 4, as I felt utterly confused when facing double roundabouts designed for cars, but no clear cycle path. My maps did not match my reality. I found a Heathrow employee who was riding home on his bike, who kindly pointed me in one direction. But after pedaling where he pointed me, I soon decided this was backwards and started pedaling in the opposite direction, then passed him while he stood at a bus stop, waiting to board with his bike. We waved at one another. Guess I'll count that as an American-to-English miscommunication, and probably my fault.

{% include figure image_path="images/2024/europe/heathrow-cycle-map.jpg" alt="Heathrow map" caption="Still wondering about the best way to bike out from the Central Terminal Area at London Heathrow Airport." %}{: .align-center style="width:75%;"}

Eventually I found my way onto the walk-and-bike route out of Heathrow T4 that matched my 30 km (18 mile) [Cycle.Travel route](https://cycle.travel/map/journey/556963) to Ilya's neighborhood in northwest London. This unseasonably warm and sunshine-filled Saturday was an absolutely delightful time to pedal along the Union Canal path for walkers and cyclists. Fortunately, a day before my trip I suddenly realized that *driving on the left side of the road* also meant *biking on the left side*. To drill this foreign concept into my head, I carefully studied twenty minutes of British safe-cycling videos. Once I got past Heathrow airport, I quickly adapted to *left turns* being easier than right turns, and *going left and clockwise* at roundabouts, rather than right and counterclockwise. One surprise was that on the narrow Union Canal path, oncoming walkers and cyclists generally (but not consistently) stayed to my right, the opposite of what I'm used to in the U.S. *Hug left*, I kept telling myself, worried that in a moment of panic I might accidentally revert to staying right, as we do in the States. One downside is that my right-eye vision loss means that cyclists from behind pass me on my blind side, and with my mirror mounted on the (US) left side of my handlebars, I was lucky to catch a glimpse of them before they overtook me. *Remain calm and carry on*, the British say, and it will all get *sorted out*.

{% include figure image_path="images/2024/europe/canal.jpg" alt="Canal images" caption="Beautiful ride along the Union Canal with houseboats, and [my Cycle.Travel route](https://cycle.travel/map/journey/556963) from Heathrow to Ilya's neighborhood." %}{: .align-center}

Ilya and his husband Harry were not just fantastic, but *amazing* hosts (a word favored by marketing pros, I'm told). They warmly welcomed me into their flat, cooked me several delicious meals, and engaged in delightfully witty and insightful conversation. Also, it's possible I was an unwitting marketing test subject for a new service called *Ilya's Invigorating Tours of London by Foot and Bike*, as we walked 3 hours through neighborhoods and parks on the Saturday afternoon after I arrived by bike, then pedaled 55 km (33 miles) to more distant neighborhoods and parks on Sunday. [Ilya is now a doctoral student in geography at University College London](https://ilyankou.com), and he and I both share an appreciation for biking around cities---on our matching Brompton folding bikes---to experience the wide variety of places where people live, work, and visit. London's biking infrastructure is very good, by US standards, and many riders pedaled with us on their blue-painted Cycle Superhighways and extensive network of smaller local bike routes.

{% include figure image_path="images/2024/europe/london.jpg" alt="London images" caption="Top left clockwise: Amazing hosts Ilya and Harry; View from Primrose Hill; Our Brompton bikes outside the market in West Hempstead; Blue-painted Cycle Superhighway near Big Ben." %}{: .align-center style="width:75%;"}

On Monday morning, as the warm sunshine turned into a cold rain more typical for mid-April in London, Ilya kindly led me by bike through morning traffic to the St. Pancras International Station to catch my EuroStar train to Rotterdam, Netherlands. As Eurostar requested, I placed my Brompton inside one of my IKEA bags (without cardboard padding), carried it on board, and placed it in the luggage rack at the rear of my coach. My train trip went very smoothly, except for two Americans in front of me who realized that they were in the *right seats on the wrong train* (and disembarked, fortunately, just before we left London), and also a very-friendly-yet-mildly-annoying window-seat passenger who politely asked me to let him out at least *five times* during the two-hour leg of my journey through Brussels. I asked if he wanted to trade seats and sit next to the aisle, but he wasn't interested. More American-European miscommunications, I suppose.

{% include figure image_path="images/2024/europe/train.jpg" alt="Eurostar train images" caption="Ilya navigated me to London's EuroStar train station, where I bagged my bike before boarding." %}{: .align-center style="width:75%;"}

On Monday afternoon, I arrived in Rotterdam, a city full of separated bike paths and crazy architecture. Was so happy to roll my bike out of the train station (after a police officer kindly explained that I needed to scan my EuroStar train ticket to pass through the turnstile) and into the sunshine! Then I pedaled about 2 km to [StayOkay Hostel-Rotterdam](https://www.stayokay.com/en/hostel/rotterdam), where I'm sleeping inside one of the [Cube House](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cube_house) rooms. The building also serves as a architectural museum. Will keep the door locked tonight to avoid any unexpected visitors or further American-European miscommunications.

{% include figure image_path="images/2024/europe/bike-hail.jpg" alt="bike and hail images" caption="In Rotterdam, surrounded by bikes at the central train station, and later, briefly by thunder hail." %}{: .align-center style="width:75%;"}

I did not expect the sunshine to last as long as it did today, which was wonderful, but also surprising to experience a totally unexpected *thunder hail storm* for three minutes while walking around the downtown area this evening. Fortunately, it passed by very quickly. Hoping for clearer skies later this week.

{% include figure image_path="images/2024/europe/cube-house.jpg" alt="Cube House images" caption="Spending the night in a funky Cube House room at StayOkay Hostel-Rotterdam" %}{: .align-center style="width:75%;"}

Adventures to be continued... Tuesday night in The Hague, the Beth and our daughter Maya will join me Wednesday and Thursday night on a houseboat in Amsterdam, and Friday and Saturday night in nearby Haarlem and the Leiden tulip festival. Stay tuned.
